add GOVERNANCE.md document (#5772)
Rdatatable/data.table: GOVERNANCE.md

Governance for the R data.table project

> 

Reviewer: Do we want to add a date to this? Maybe an initial accepted version date and then an updated date for any changes down the road?

Reviewer 2: could be, but as this document lives in git in is not that much use of the date here

Author: agree that a changelog / version history would be useful, will add that at the bottom.

# Purpose and scope

## This document

> The purpose of this document is to define how people related to the project work together, so that the project can expand to handle more contributions, from a larger and more diverse group of contributors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The purpose of this document is to define how people related to the project work together, so that the project can expand to handle a larger and more diverse group of contributors.
```

## The R package

The purpose of the project is to maintain the R data.table package,
which is guided by the following principles:

> * Few (if any) dependencies

Reviewer 3: 'dependencies' is very overloaded here.

 - System vs. other R package dependencies (we want to minimize both)
 - Enhances/Suggests/Imports/LinkingTo/Depends dependencies (on R packages). I think we want _strictly 0_ Imports/LinkingTo/Depends dependencies (well, maybe we could eventually split `IDateTime` into its own package that we depend on -- so more specifically, _strictly 0 **external** dependencies_, meaning those not maintained by the project). And then few (if any) Suggests/Enhances dependencies.

* Time & memory efficiency
* Concise syntax (minimal redundancy in code)

> * Stable code base (easy for users to upgrade to new data.table, and compatible with old R versions)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Stable code base (strong preference for back-compatibility with data.table itself and with old versions of R)
```

possibly

Author: I liked "easy for users" because of how it makes you think of the user experience when upgrading, but I like "back-compatible" too

Reviewer 3: How about "strong preference for user-friendly back-compatiblity..." ? Agree user-centricity is important to emphasize.

> * Comprehensive and accessible documentation

Reviewer 3: Still wonder if this and the next bullet should be merged, especially the use of "accessible" which hints at "internationalization" to me. i18n is borne out much more in error/warning space. Possibly:

```suggestion
* Comprehensive and accessible documentation and run-time signals (errors, warnings)
```

* Clear error and warning messages

To prioritize developer time, we define what is in and out of scope.

> The current scope of package functionality includes:

Reviewer 2: I would mention some low lever functions like forder , to be exported

* Data manipulation and analysis 
    * reshaping/pivoting
    * aggregation/summarizing

>     * subsetting rows

Reviewer 3: feels needlessly un-parallel for rows vs. columns

```suggestion
    * adding/updating/deleting rows
```

Author: I thought that would be inefficient?

    * all sorts of joins
    * adding/updating/deleting columns

> * Reading/writing of data from/to many file formats

Reviewer 2: csv, rather than many formats. Or just a flat files.

Functionality that is out of scope:
* plotting/graphics (like ggplot2)

> * manipulating data stored on disk (or remote SQL DB) rather than in memory (like sqldf / dbplyr)

Reviewer 2: on-disk memory mapped files are in scope

Author: is there any implementation of that currently? I thought there was not. Does anyone have a plan for that? If not, I would suggest to leave it out of scope, so that we can prioritize developer time (at least until some one provides an initial implementation).
There are a number of related open issues that could be closed if we decide this is out of scope
* read parquet, https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/2026 -> this is an interesting one because it wants the `DT[i,j,by]` syntax to access a parquet file, which is a cool idea, but I would say that is out of scope for data.table itself, but could be implemented in another package.
* file-backed (csv) data tables, https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1336
* chunked fread https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1721
* etc https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+disk
To be clear, I have no problem with putting "manipulating data stored on disk" in scope, if there is general consensus. But I would like to suggest we consider leaving it out of scope (at least for now, considering lack of implementation, and scarcity of dev time).

Reviewer 2: There is no, but this is on the roadmap. Unless scope defines only current scope?

Reviewer 3: The previous section starts:

> The current scope of package functionality includes:

So I guess this section is "currently out-of-scope". And process for changing this document is laid out below to be no-headache, so we can easily expand the scope later.

Maybe we need to make note about what sorts of "out-of-current-scope" external contributions are welcome?

Author: In response to scope discussions, I intended "scope" to represent what is currently implemented, and what we want to focus dev/maintenance time on. So then it is easy to close issues that are out of scope, and save dev time.

> Maybe we need to make note about what sorts of "out-of-current-scope" external contributions are welcome?

I would say that "out-of-current-scope" contributions are not welcome, so if someone wants to contribute something that is currently out of scope, they first have to get involved with the project and change scope.

Author: Jan do you approve like this? If not, what modifications would you suggest?

Reviewer 2: Considering it is current scope, and not future roadmap then this point is resolved

> * manipulating data stored on disk (or remote SQL DB) rather than in memory (like sqldf / dbplyr)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* manipulating out-of-memory data, e.g. data stored on disk or remote SQL DB, (as opposed e.g. to sqldf / dbplyr)
```

possibly

> * machine learning / modeling (like mlr3)

Reviewer 3: not clear what we mean here -- I think we obviously expect (and encourage!) the package to be used extensively as a tool by ML practitioners. what sorts of features are we ruling out here?

Author: For example, I don't think data.table should provide implementation of ML-related data manipulation operations like one-hot encoding

Reviewer 3: Gotcha. I wouldn't totally close off helpful features like this -- `tstrsplit()` and `frollapply()` come to mind. Maybe one-hot encoding is too domain-specific, but if we can offer high-performance (e.g. best-in-class) broad-utility helper functions for data analysis/munging, I don't want to shy away too generically.

Reviewer 2: Pointing out mlr3 next to ggplot2 makes it pretty that we just don't want to duplicate functionality of those great packages. Let me resolve this one by change suggestion below.

> * regular expression builders (like rex and nc packages) 

Reviewer 3: this one seems a bit out of place, do we really need to mention it?

>     * subset/bind rows (rbindlist)

Reviewer 2: rbindlist doesn't really fit in this point. It is a one of the ?setops so if we want to have it here then we can add point about setops

> Functionality that is out of current scope:

Reviewer 3: suggested out-of-scope:

\* Reading/writing of data from/to binary files like parquet

The "flat (plain text) files" entry under "in scope" may be enough to exclude this, I'm wondering if it's worth emphasizing that by contrast binary formats are not in scope.

# Roles 

## Contributor

* Definition: a user who has written/commented at least one issue, worked to label/triage issues, written a blog post, given a talk, etc. 
* How this role is recognized: there is no central list of contributors / no formal recognition for contributors.

## Project member

* Definition: some one who has submitted at least one PR that has been merged into master. 

> * How to obtain this role: any user can become a member by submitting a PR, then having it reviewed and merged into master. Contributors who have written issues should be encouraged to submit their first PR to become a project member.

Reviewer 2: There was something about code-contribution, so things like spelling fixes in docs don't count

> * How to obtain this role: any user can become a member by submitting a PR, then having it reviewed and merged into master. Contributors who have written issues should be encouraged to submit their first PR to become a project member.

Reviewer 3: might be worth calling out the [`beginner-task`](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/labels/beginner-task) label as a place for new contributors to consider looking for comparatively straightforward opportunities to help?

## Reviewer

* Definition: a member who has volunteered to do code reviews for some features/files. 
* How to obtain this role: after one or more significant PRs to a given file, a member should be invited to add their name as a reviewer of that file in CODEOWNERS, and after that is merged into master, then they are considered a reviewer. 
* How this role is recognized: same credit in DESCRIPTION as a regular member, role="ctb" (so they appear in Author list on CRAN). 
* Note: having your name in CODEOWNERS does not give any special permission, but it does mean that you will be notified whenever there is a new PR with changes to that file. 

## Committer

* Definition: permission to commit to, and merge PRs into, master branch. 

> * How to obtain this role: after a reviewer has a consistent history of careful reviews of others' PRs, then a current GitHub maintainer should ask all other current GitHub maintainers if they approve promoting the reviewer to GitHub maintainer, and it should be done if there is general consensus/agreement. 

Reviewer 3: Should we formalize "retirement", if full consensus is needed to grow the "pool" of committers? Or have a policy of "non-response is tacit agreement"? Complexity of getting consensus o/w risks getting out of control.

Author: I think "non-response is tacit agreement" is what I intended, we should clarify

> * How to obtain this role: after a reviewer has a consistent history of careful reviews of others' PRs, then a current Committer should ask all other current Committers if they approve promoting the Reviewer to Committer, and it should be done if there is Consensus among active Committers. 

Reviewer 3: "Consensus" being capitalized makes it seem like it's a very specific term to be defined? I guess it's just meant to be `c`, but a definition of consensus I'd put forward otherwise is "no strong disagreement".

Reviewer 3: ! I finished reading :)

* How this role is recognized: credited via role="aut" in DESCRIPTION (so they appear in Author list on CRAN), and added to https://github.com/orgs/Rdatatable/teams/maintainers which gives permission to merge PRs into master branch. 

## CRAN maintainer

* Definition: in charge of communication with CRAN. Responsible for submitting releases to CRAN on a regular basis, and for responding to requests from CRAN.
* How to obtain this role: (1) merge into master a PR adding role="cre" to DESCRIPTION, and (2) submit updated package to CRAN (previous CRAN maintainer will have to confirm change by email to CRAN). 
* How this role is recognized: credited via role="cre" in DESCRIPTION, so they appear as Maintainer on CRAN. 

## Other roles

> Each of the below roles is important, and a wiki page should be

Reviewer 3: Why "should be"? Shouldn't we at least create a stub Wiki before merging this PR?

Reviewer 2: I am against keeping info in wiki, in favor of having extra markdown file in .dev dir, or wherever that document fits

Author: I have not carefully thought about this section before writing it, sorry.
I wanted to mention these other roles as important, but I did not want to give full definition / documentation of them in the governance document, so I deferred to the wiki, for example https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/wiki/Release-management-and-revdep-checks for the rev dep manager. Do you think I should just remove this section from the governance? or move to markdown file in .dev?

Reviewer 2: I would just cut off this

> and a wiki page should be created to explain (1) details of responsibilities, (2) who to contact
to obtain this role.

As long as those roles are being executed by volunteers it make sense to have them rather loosely defined. Otherwise it imposes pressure what someone "should" be doing.

Author: so what change would you suggest? I'm not sure what cut off this means.
I'm leaning toward removing this section entirely, and just mentioning these roles on https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/wiki/Contributing

Reviewer 2: cut off = remove

Author: removed

to obtain this role.

* translation manager (to communicate with translators), no special permission.
* triage manager (to decide which issues/PRs to include in next releases), no special permission.
* performance testing manager (to prevent performance regressions), need permission to edit continuous integration scripts.
* reverse dependency manager (to ensure compatibility with other CRAN packages), need access to a computer that can run revdep checks in parallel.
* binary manager (to build binaries of development branches for user testing before release), need permission to edit continuous deployment scripts.

> 

Reviewer 2: Yes binaries should be part of CI.

For windows we do have them already.
For macos... we should have, but somehow doesn't seem to work - I asked https://forum.gitlab.com/t/macos-shared-runner-not-available-for-open-source-projects/96063
but on free plan there is no support available so we may not get a response.

# Decision-making processes

## Pull Requests

A pull request can be merged, as long as there is one approving review

> (ideally from a reviewer of the affected files, different person from

Author: My preference is to not activate the repo settings which would require an Approval, and instead trust judgment of people with permissions. We could activate that later if there are any issues that come up?

> (ideally from a reviewer of the affected files, different person from

Reviewer 3: OK SG

Examples of unacceptable behavior by participants include the use of sexual language or imagery, derogatory comments or personal attacks, trolling, public or private harassment, insults, or other unprofessional conduct.

Project maintainers have the right and responsibility to remove, edit, or reject comments, commits, code, wiki edits, issues, and other contributions that are not aligned to this Code of Conduct. A person with special roles who does not follow the Code of Conduct may have their roles revoked.

Instances of abusive, harassing, or otherwise unacceptable behavior may be reported by opening an issue or emailing one or more of the Committers.

This Code of Conduct is adapted from Tidyverse code of conduct.

# Version numbering

data.table Version line in DESCRIPTION typically has the following meanings

* x.y.z where x=major, y=minor, z=patch/hotfix.
* x should be incremented only for major backwards-incompatible changes.
* z is even for CRAN releases, odd for GitHub development.
* z=99 for master branch with new features (for example 1.14.99 or 1.15.99), which eventually becomes a regular CRAN release, with incremented y and z=0 (for example 1.15.0 or 1.16.0).

> * patch/hotfix development should occur on GitHub as z=odd (1.15.1) and release to CRAN as z=even (1.15.2).

Reviewer 3: OK, maybe makes more sense to visualize this with branches too:

```
master                 patch-branch
1.16.0 (local-only)
1.16.99                \
                         1.16.1
                       /
1.16.2 (tag-only)                                                   
1.16.99                \
1.16.99                  1.16.3
1.16.4 (tag-only)
1.16.99
1.17.0 (local-only)
1.17.99
...
```

basically, only `x.y.99` ever lives on GitHub master. `x.y.{1,3,5,7,9}` versions only live in a patch branch, and are always split from the most recent `x.y.{0,2,4,6,8}` CRAN release.

This satisfies `MAX(version(CRAN, patches, master)) = version(master)` and `version(patch) > version(CRAN)`.

LMK if I still sound confused, but it's making more sense to me & I agree with this approach.

Governance for the R data.table project

# Purpose and scope

## This document

The purpose of this document is to define how people related to the project work together, so that the project can expand to handle a larger and more diverse group of contributors.

## The R package

The purpose of the project is to maintain the R data.table package, which is guided by the following principles:

* No external Imports/LinkingTo/Depends dependencies (external meaning those not maintained by the project)
* Few (if any) Suggests/Enhances dependencies
* Time & memory efficiency
* Concise syntax (minimal redundancy in code)
* Stable code base (strong preference for user-friendly back-compatibility with data.table itself and with old versions of R)
* Comprehensive and accessible documentation and run-time signals (errors, warnings)

> To prioritize developer time, we define what is in and out of current scope. Feature requests in issues and pull requests that are out of current scope should be closed immediately, because they are not the current priority. If someone wants to contribute code that is currently out of scope, they first have to make a pull request that changes the scope as defined below.

Reviewer 4: This seems a bit contrary to me regarding the current `Contributing` wiki entry, in particular 
> So, before you spend the time getting to that stage, it may save you time to create an issue first and start a discussion to see if your idea would be accepted in principle. If you are going to spend more than a day on the PR, creating an issue first lets other people know you are working on it to save duplicating effort.

In any case we should check to keep consistency between wiki and the Governance.md

Author: What seems contrary? What would you suggest changing? 
It seems to me that the wiki is consistent. It is a good idea to create an issue first to make sure the idea would be accepted in principle (=is in scope).

Reviewer 4: But being currently out of scope does not mean that it would not be accepted if somebody is willing to put the time into it (particularly thinking about large file or database support). That's what I'm finding contradictory.

Reviewer 2: Creating issue first before submitting PR is always good choice. Any design discussions (+ in//out scope) should be taking place in the issue, and implementation discussions in the PR. I know that reality is/will be very different, but at least that should be our aim.

The current scope of package functionality includes:
* Data manipulation and analysis 
    * reshaping/pivoting
    * aggregation/summarizing (via `[,, by=...]` and _grouping sets_)
    * filtering rows
    * all sorts of joins
    * adding/updating/deleting columns
    * set operations (union/rbind, intersection, difference)
* high-performance common functions (`frank`, `fcase`, `fifelse`, `transpose`, `chmatch`, `fsort`, `forder`, `uniqueN`, ...)
* common convenience functions (`%like%`, `%notin%`, `timetaken`, `substitute2`, ...)

> * ordered data functions (rleid, shift, coalesce, _locf_/_nocb_ nafill, rolling functions)

Reviewer 4: Add markdown to `rleid` etc.

> * ordered data functions (rleid, shift, coalesce, _locf_/_nocb_ nafill, rolling functions)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* ordered data functions (`rleid`, `shift`, `fcoalesce`, _locf_/_nocb_ `nafill`, rolling functions)
```

* date and time related classes and functions (`IDate`, `ITime`)
* technical functions (`address`, `tables`, `update_dev_pkg`)
* Reading/writing of data from/to flat (plain text) files like CSV

Functionality that is out of current scope:
* Plotting/graphics (like ggplot2)
* Manipulating out-of-memory data, e.g. data stored on disk or remote SQL DB, (as opposed e.g. to sqldf / dbplyr)
* Machine learning / modeling (like mlr3)
* Reading/writing of data from/to binary files like parquet

# Roles 

## Contributor

* Definition: a user who has written/commented at least one issue, worked to label/triage issues, written a blog post, given a talk, etc. 
* How this role is recognized: there is no central list of contributors / no formal recognition for contributors.

## Project member

> * Definition: some one who has submitted at least one PR with code contributions, that has been merged into master. (spelling fixes in docs do not count)

Reviewer 4: might even change this to "(PRs improving documentation are welcome but do not count)"?

Author: changed to "some one who has submitted at least one PR with substantial contributions, that has been merged into master. PRs improving documentation are welcome, and substantial contributions to the docs should count toward membership, but minor contributions such as spelling fixes do not count toward membership."

* How this role is recognized: same credit in DESCRIPTION as a regular member, role="ctb" (so they appear in Author list on CRAN). 
* Note: having your name in CODEOWNERS does not give any special permission, but it does mean that you will be notified whenever there is a new PR with changes to that file. 

## Committer

* Definition: permission to commit to, and merge PRs into, master branch. 
* How to obtain this role: after a reviewer has a consistent history of careful reviews of others' PRs, then a current Committer should ask all other current Committers if they approve promoting the Reviewer to Committer, and it should be done if there is Consensus among active Committers. 
* How this role is recognized: credited via role="aut" in DESCRIPTION (so they appear in Author list on CRAN), and added to https://github.com/orgs/Rdatatable/teams/maintainers which gives permission to merge PRs into master branch. 

## CRAN maintainer

* Definition: in charge of communication with CRAN. Responsible for submitting releases to CRAN on a regular basis, and for responding to requests from CRAN.

> * How to obtain this role: (1) merge into master a PR adding role="cre" to DESCRIPTION, and (2) submit updated package to CRAN (previous CRAN maintainer will have to confirm change by email to CRAN). 

Reviewer 4: This seems a bit ill-phrased since new Comitters need to be a consensus voting but new CRAN maintainers are just decided by the current CRAN maintainer?

Author: what change would you suggest?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* How to obtain this role: (1) create a PR into master adding role="cre" to DESCRIPTION. This PR has to approved by consensus of committers with a voting period of at least two weeks. (2) submit updated package to CRAN (previous CRAN maintainer will have to confirm change by email to CRAN).
```

Maybe something like this? I would definitely like a lower bound on the voting period (maybe even 4 or more weeks) for major team changes like committer and CRAN maintainer since non-response counts as approval.

Author: two weeks seems reasonable to me. I would change to the following though, to avoid "voting period" since voting process is not defined (but consensus is).

(1) create a PR into master adding role="cre" to DESCRIPTION. This PR has to approved by Consensus of committers with review period of at least two weeks.

Reviewer 2: I think it also make sense for Matt to be included in deciding future CRAN maintainer changes.

Author: I don't think we should specifically mention Matt, but Matt would definitely be included, because he is a committer. Is that sufficient?

* Translation manager (to communicate with translators, and source code changes related to i18n, for example making sure messages are translation-ready, updating the .pot template), no special permissions (updates should happen in a pull request as usual).
* Performance testing manager (to prevent performance regressions), no special permissions (updates should happen in a pull request as usual).
* Continuous integration/deployment manager (to maintain script which run tests and build binaries of development branches for user testing before release), no special permissions (updates should happen in a pull request as usual).
* Reverse dependency manager (to ensure compatibility with other CRAN packages), need access to a computer that can run revdep checks in parallel.

# Decision-making processes

## Definition of Consensus

Most decisions in the project happen by Consensus, which means that no active people (typically Reviewers and/or Committers) have expressed major blocking concerns, in a public discussion (typically in a GitHub issue or pull request). In Consensus, non-response by inactive members indicates tacit agreement.

## Pull Requests

> A pull request can be merged as long as there is one approving review (ideally from a reviewer of the affected files, different person from author of PR), and Consensus from active Reviewers and Committers.

Reviewer 4: Since consensus is also reached by public silence we might want to raise the barrier from 1 reviewer to 1 reviewer + 1 committer and lift the different person constraint?

Or is the committer always supposed to review except if own PR?

Author: hi does this clarify your concern?
```markdown
A pull request can be merged by any committer, if there is one approving review, and Consensus from active Reviewers and Committers. 
* approving review must come from different person from author of PR.
* approving review ideally comes from a reviewer of the affected files.
* approving review can be same as committer who merges the PR.
```

Reviewer 4: Sounds good, ty

## CRAN updates

* Regular CRAN releases should ideally occur twice per year, and can include new features.
* A hotfix/patch CRAN release should occur when CRAN asks for one, at which time the CRAN maintainer should post an issue on github, and ask others to help fix/prepare the release.
* Both kinds of releases should be discussed in an issue, and the release should happen only if there is Consensus among active Reviewers and Committers.
* It is the responsibility of the CRAN maintainer to ensure quality prior to release. This includes CRAN checks, unit tests, performance tests, etc, and these tasks can be delegated to others. 

## Changing this GOVERNANCE.md document

There is no special process for changing this document (submit a PR
and ask for review).

# Code of conduct

> As contributors and maintainers of this project, we pledge to respect all people who contribute through reporting issues, posting feature requests, updating documentation, submitting pull requests or patches, and other activities.

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't contributors be enough, since some roles are sublevel inclusive?
Otherwise we might need to mention the other roles too.

We are committed to making participation in this project a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of level of experience, gender, gender identity and expression, sexual orientation, disability, personal appearance, body size, race, ethnicity, age, religion, etc.

Examples of unacceptable behavior by participants include the use of sexual language or imagery, derogatory comments or personal attacks, trolling, public or private harassment, insults, or other unprofessional conduct.

Committers have the right and responsibility to remove, edit, or reject comments, commits, code, wiki edits, issues, and other contributions that are not aligned to this Code of Conduct. A person with special roles who does not follow the Code of Conduct may have their roles revoked.

Instances of abusive, harassing, or otherwise unacceptable behavior may be reported by opening an issue or emailing one or more of the Committers.

This Code of Conduct is adapted from Tidyverse code of conduct.

# Version numbering

data.table Version line in DESCRIPTION typically has the following meanings

> * x.y.z where x=major, y=minor, z=patch/hotfix.

Reviewer 4: z=patch/hotfix/devel

> * x.y.z where x=major, y=minor, z=patch/hotfix.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* x.y.z where x=major, y=minor, z=patch/hotfix/devel.
```

Governance for the R data.table project

# Purpose and scope

## This document

The purpose of this document is to define how people related to the project work together, so that the project can expand to handle a larger and more diverse group of contributors.

## The R package

The purpose of the project is to maintain the R data.table package, which is guided by the following principles:

> * No external Imports/LinkingTo/Depends dependencies (external meaning those not maintained by the project)

Reviewer 3: Somewhat minor, I think order matters here (or we should explicitly say "in no particular order", and alphabetize). 

How about:

```suggestion
* Time & memory efficiency
* Concise syntax (minimal redundancy in code)
* No external Imports/LinkingTo/Depends dependencies (external meaning those not maintained by the project)
* Few (if any) Suggests/Enhances dependencies
* Stable code base (strong preference for user-friendly back-compatibility with data.table itself and with old versions of R)
* Comprehensive and accessible documentation and run-time signals (errors, warnings)
```

* Few (if any) Suggests/Enhances dependencies
* Time & memory efficiency
* Concise syntax (minimal redundancy in code)
* Stable code base (strong preference for user-friendly back-compatibility with data.table itself and with old versions of R)
* Comprehensive and accessible documentation and run-time signals (errors, warnings)

To prioritize developer time, we define what is in and out of current scope. Feature requests in issues and pull requests that are out of current scope should be closed immediately, because they are not the current priority. If someone wants to contribute code that is currently out of scope, they first have to make a pull request that changes the scope as defined below.

The current scope of package functionality includes:

> * Data manipulation and analysis 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* data manipulation and analysis 
```

    * reshaping/pivoting
    * aggregation/summarizing (via `[,, by=...]` and _grouping sets_)
    * filtering rows
    * all sorts of joins
    * adding/updating/deleting columns
    * set operations (union/rbind, intersection, difference)
* high-performance common functions (`frank`, `fcase`, `fifelse`, `transpose`, `chmatch`, `fsort`, `forder`, `uniqueN`, ...)
* common convenience functions (`%like%`, `%notin%`, `timetaken`, `substitute2`, ...)
* ordered data functions (`rleid`, `shift`, `fcoalesce`, _locf_/_nocb_ `nafill`, rolling functions)
* date and time related classes and functions (`IDate`, `ITime`)
* technical functions (`address`, `tables`, `update_dev_pkg`)
* Reading/writing of data from/to flat (plain text) files like CSV

Functionality that is out of current scope:
* Plotting/graphics (like ggplot2)
* Manipulating out-of-memory data, e.g. data stored on disk or remote SQL DB, (as opposed e.g. to sqldf / dbplyr)

> * Machine learning / modeling (like mlr3)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Machine learning (like mlr3)
```
I removed "modeling" because "data modeling" (not statistical modeling) is very much a thing that I was using data.table years before when working on data warehousing projects.

* Reading/writing of data from/to binary files like parquet

# Roles 

> ## Contributor

Reviewer 3: Working on #4278, I wondered if something like "data.table project style guide" is in-scope to discuss here.

Author: Maybe but if so I would not include any details, instead just link to a wiki page.

## Committer

* Definition: permission to commit to, and merge PRs into, master branch. 
* How to obtain this role: after a reviewer has a consistent history of careful reviews of others' PRs, then a current Committer should ask all other current Committers if they approve promoting the Reviewer to Committer, and it should be done if there is Consensus among active Committers. 
* How this role is recognized: credited via role="aut" in DESCRIPTION (so they appear in Author list on CRAN), and added to https://github.com/orgs/Rdatatable/teams/maintainers which gives permission to merge PRs into master branch. 

## CRAN maintainer

* Definition: in charge of communication with CRAN. Responsible for submitting releases to CRAN on a regular basis, and for responding to requests from CRAN.
* How to obtain this role: (1) merge into master a PR adding role="cre" to DESCRIPTION, and (2) submit updated package to CRAN (previous CRAN maintainer will have to confirm change by email to CRAN). 
* How this role is recognized: credited via role="cre" in DESCRIPTION, so they appear as Maintainer on CRAN. 

## Other roles

> Each of the below roles is important, , (2) who to contact

Reviewer 3: something leftover here or is this WIP?

Author: i just deleted the Other roles section

* Performance testing manager (to prevent performance regressions), no special permissions (updates should happen in a pull request as usual).
* Continuous integration/deployment manager (to maintain script which run tests and build binaries of development branches for user testing before release), no special permissions (updates should happen in a pull request as usual).
* Reverse dependency manager (to ensure compatibility with other CRAN packages), need access to a computer that can run revdep checks in parallel.

# Decision-making processes

## Definition of Consensus

Most decisions in the project happen by Consensus, which means that no active people (typically Reviewers and/or Committers) have expressed major blocking concerns, in a public discussion (typically in a GitHub issue or pull request). In Consensus, non-response by inactive members indicates tacit agreement.

## Pull Requests

A pull request can be merged by any committer, if there is one approving review, and Consensus from active Reviewers and Committers. 

> * approving review must come from different person from author of PR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* approving review must come from someone other than the author of the PR.
```

* approving review ideally comes from a reviewer of the affected files.

> * approving review can be same as committer who merges the PR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* approving review can and often will be by the committer who merges the PR.
```

## CRAN updates

* Regular CRAN releases should ideally occur twice per year, and can include new features.

> * A hotfix/patch CRAN release should occur when CRAN asks for one, at which time the CRAN maintainer should post an issue on github, and ask others to help fix/prepare the release.

Reviewer 3: Contrast with prior bullet

```suggestion
* A hotfix/patch CRAN release should occur when CRAN asks for one, at which time the CRAN maintainer should post an issue on github, and ask others to help fix/prepare the release. It should not include new features.
```

* Comprehensive and accessible documentation and run-time signals (errors, warnings)
* Clear error and warning messages

> To prioritize developer time, we define what is in and out of current scope. Feature requests in issues and pull requests that are out of current scope should be closed immediately, because they are not the current priority. If someone wants to contribute code that is currently out of scope, they first have to make a pull request that changes the scope as defined below.

Author: here is the addition I made to clarify current scope and how to change it

Reviewer: I like this. The process makes sense that we'd get to review this change before they put in a bunch of work on something that isn't wanted.

    * subset/bind rows (rbindlist)
    * all sorts of joins
    * adding/updating/deleting columns
* high-performance common functions (`frank`, `fcase`, `fifelse`, `transpose`, `chmatch`, `fsort`, `forder`, `uniqueN`, ...)
* common convenience functions (`%like%`, `%notin%`, `timetaken`, `substitute2`, ...)

> * ordered data functions (rleid, shift, coalesce, _locf_/_nocb_ nafill, rolling functions)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ordered data functions (_rleid_, shift, coalesce, _locf_/_nocb_ nafill, rolling functions)
```
